---
categories: [blog]
date: 2016-04-21 13:15:00
layout: post
title: "Spending More Time With My Nieces!!"
---

As I continue growing and learning, I realized that I have three amazing nieces. Over the years I spent most of my time in college studying that I forgot about my nieces. The only time I see them is during the holidays, I would play games and watch movies with them. They changed my life ever since junior high school, I still remember the day my first niece was born. I was in the seventh grade when my mom took me to the hospital, I saw something that forever changed my view on life. It was a room full of sleeping babies lined up in rows and columns, that's when I realized life is beautiful. This blog will be about my nieces and how they changed my life!!

It all started in the seventh grade, all I care about was playing outside with my brother. I didn't know anything about human reproduction and was clueless when my mom took me to the hospital. My mom told me that I was going to see my niece, I look through a window into a room filled with sleeping babies. It was a beautiful and peaceful scene that changed how I see life. I didn't know which one would be my niece, luckily I got to see her the next day. I remember babysitting her whenever I got off school, she reminds me of when I was younger. It's amazing how we learn and grow as time passes by. In a year and some, she will have twin sisters.

The next few years I would watch them grow and learn. It was funny in the beginning when they sleep most of the time and would cry whenever they are hungry. There are many moments when they wake up and stare into my eyes without saying a word. It was hard for me to understand them, all they do was make noise or cry. Soon they will learn how to crawl and play with toys. One of my niece has a pink teddy bear that she loves, I would take the bear away from her just to see her reaction. She would extend her arms out and do a grabbing motions with her hands while making a funny noise. I would follow and watch them crawl everywhere in the house. In a blink of an eye they know how to walk and seconds later they know how to talk. As I grow myself, I started to drift away from them.

What did I learn from spending time with my nieces over the years? Life is beautiful!! I started to think about my future and what I wanted in life. Time is constantly moving forward and we have a finite amount of it. I was always afraid of the opposite sex, seem like girls are from an other planet. After spending time with my nieces, I realized we are the same!! Some of the featuers I realized are more common in girls are emotions and jealousy. Girls might let their emotions take over and are very jealous of other girls. Lastly, my nieces show me how to be happy and smile, everytime I see them they are happy and always smiling!!

I wanted to spend more time with my nieces, so I told them I will be teaching them how to program while playing with them. I spent the day with my nieces Sunday playing card games and playing Lightbot on <a href="https://code.org/learn" target="_blank">code.org</a>. I found out one of my nieces wants to become an author and writes books!! They will show me movies they want to watch, we would watch movie trailers on youtube. They love Lindsey Stirling music videos, I was able to listen to them sing. I told them that I will spend more time with them by visiting them on the weekends!! I plan on learning and growing with my nieces while teaching them how to code.