---
author: Anders Ericsson and Robert Pool
categories: [book]
class: 22
date: 2017-01-22 10:00:00
description: A better way to see ourselves would be "practicing man," the species that takes control of its life through practice and makes of itself what it will. All we have to do is use deliberate practice to get the skills we desire. With the help of our adaptable and flexible brain and body, we can create our own potential and control our own lives.
hidden: true
img-path: /assets/images/books/peak.jpg
layout: book
permalink: /peak/
title: "PEAK - SECRETS FROM THE NEW SCIENCE OF EXPERTISE"
---

We are all endowed with a brain so flexible and adaptable that it could, with the right sort of training, develop a capability that seems quite magical to those of us who do not possess it. Realize that the brain, even the adult brain, is for more adaptable than anyone ever imagined, and this gives us a tremendous amount of control over what our brains are able to do. Both the brain and body are more adaptable in young children than in adults. Still both the brain and body retain great deal of adaptability throughout adulthood.

We all have the adaptability of the human brain and body. Some people are amazingly good at what they do through dedicated training that drives changes in the brain (and sometimes depending on the ability, in the body) that make it possible for them to do things that they otherwise could not. The ability to create, through the right sort of training and practice, abilities that they would not otherwise possess by taking advantage of the incredible adaptability of the human brain and body.

This book is about a fundamentally new way of thinking about human potential, we have far more power than we ever realized to take control of our own lives. In this new world, it no longer makes sense to think of people as born with fixed reserves of potential; instead, potential is an expandable vessel, shaped by the various things we do throughout our lives. Learning isn't a way of reaching one's potential but rather a way of developing it. We can create our own potential.

Deliberate practice remains the gold standard for anyone in any field who wishes to take advantage of the gift of adaptability in order to build new skills and abilities.

<ul class="collapsible popout" data-collapsible="expandable">
  <li>
    <div class="collapsible-header"><i class="fa fa-book" style="margin-top: 10px;"></i><p style="margin: 0; overflow: auto; overflow: auto; padding: 10px 0;">The Power of Purposeful Practice</p></div>
    <div class="collapsible-body" style="padding: 0 10px;">
      <p>The answer is that the most effective and most powerful types of practice in any field work by harnessing the adaptability of the human body and brain to create, step by step, the ability to do things that were previously not possible.</p>

      <p>Once a person reaches that level of "acceptable" performance and automaticity, the additional years of "practice" don't lead to improvement.</p>

      <p>Purposeful practice has several characteristics that set it apart from what we might call "naive practice," which is essentially just doing something repeatedly, and expecting that the repetition alone will improve one's performance. Purposeful practice has well-defined, specific goals, is focused, involves feedback, and requires getting out of one's comfort zone.</p>

      <p>One caveat here is that while it is always possible to keep going and keep improving, it is not always easy. Maintaining the focus and the effort required by purposeful practice is hard work, and it is generally not fun. Meaningful positive feedback is one of the crucial factors in maintaining motivation.</p>
    </div>
  </li>
  <li>
    <div class="collapsible-header"><i class="fa fa-book" style="margin-top: 10px;"></i><p style="margin: 0; overflow: auto; overflow: auto; padding: 10px 0;">Harnessing Adaptability</p></div>
    <div class="collapsible-body" style="padding: 0 10px;">
      <p>We already know enough to have a clear idea of how purposeful and mental capabilities make it possible to do things that we never could before.</p>

      <p>The human brain grows and changes in response to intense training. The human body is incredibly adaptable, that the brain's structure and function are not fixed. They change in response to use. It is possible to shape the brain, in the way that we desire through conscious, deliberate training.</p>

      <p>Homeostasis refers to the tendency of a system to act in a way that maintains its own stability. The body desire for homeostasis can be harnessed to drive changes: push it hard enough and for long enough, and it will respond by changing in ways that make that push easier to do. You need to continually push to keep the body's compensatory changes coming, but if you push too far outside your comfort zone, you risk injuring yourself and actually setting yourself back.</p>

      <p>Long-term training results in changes in those parts of the brain that are relevant to the particular skill being developed.</p>

      <p>Regular training leads to changes in the parts of the brain that are challenged by the training. The brain adapts to these challenges by rewiring itself in ways that increase its ability to carry out the functions required by the challenges.</p>

      <p>The cognitive and physical changes caused by training requires upkeep. Stop training, and they start to go away.</p>

      <p>Most people live lives that are not particularly physically challenging. The reason that most people don't possess extraordinary physical capabilities isn't because they don't have the capacity for them, but rather because they're satisfied to live in the comfortable rut of homeostasis and never do the work that is required to get out of it. They live in the world of "good enough." But it's important to remember that the option exists. If you wish to become significantly better at something, you can.</p>

      <p>With deliberate practice the goal is not just to reach your potential but to build it, to make things possible that were not possible before. This requires challenging homeostasis, getting out of your comfort zone, and forcing your brain or your body to adapt. But once you do this, learning is no longer just a way of fulfilling some genetic destiny; it becomes a way of taking control of your destiny and shaping your potential in ways that you choose.</p>
    </div>
  </li>
  <li>
    <div class="collapsible-header"><i class="fa fa-book" style="margin-top: 10px;"></i><p style="margin: 0; overflow: auto; overflow: auto; padding: 10px 0;">Mental Representations</p></div>
    <div class="collapsible-body" style="padding: 0 10px;">
      <p>Highly developed mental processes are seen in expert performers in every field and hold the key to understanding their extraordinary abilities.</p>

      <p>A mental representation is a mental structure that corresponds to an object, an idea, a collection of information, or anything else, concrete or abstract, that the brain is thinking about.</p>

      <p>Much of deliberate practice involves developing ever more efficient mental representations that you can use in whatever activity you are practicing.</p>

      <p>A key fact about such mental representations is that they are very "domain specific," they apply only to the skills for which they were developed.</p>

      <p>The main thing that sets experts apart from the rest of us is that their years of practice have changed the neural circuitry in their brains to produce highly specialized mental representations, which in turn make possible the incredible memory, pattern recognition, problem solving, and other sorts of advanced abilities needed to excel in their particular specialties.</p>

      <p>One way in which expert performers use mental representations to improve their performance: they monitor and evaluate their performance, and, when necessary, they modify their mental representation in order to make them more effective.</p>

      <p>The relationship between skill and mental representations is a virtuous circle: the more skilled you become, the better your mental representation are, and the better your mental representation are, the more effectively you can practice to hone your skill.</p>
    </div>
  </li>
  <li>
    <div class="collapsible-header"><i class="fa fa-book" style="margin-top: 10px;"></i><p style="margin: 0; overflow: auto; overflow: auto; padding: 10px 0;">The Goal Standard</p></div>
    <div class="collapsible-body" style="padding: 0 10px;">
      <p>The goal standard is the ideal to which anyone learning a skill should aspire.</p>

      <p>If there is no agreement on what good performance is and no way to tell what changes would improve performance, then it is very difficult, often impossible, to develop effective training methods.</p>

      <p>Nobody develops extraordinary abilities without putting in tremendous amount of practice.</p>

      <p>Purposeful practice in which a person tries very hard to push himself or herself to improve. Deliberate practice is purposeful practice that knows where it is going and how to get there.</p>

      <p>First, identify the expert performers, then figure out what they do that makes them so good, then come up with training techniques that allows you to do it, too. Be careful when identifying expert performers. Ideally you want some objective measure of performance with which to compare people's abilities. Once you've identified the expert performers in a field, the next step is to figure out specifically what they do that separates them from other, less accomplished people in the same field, and what training methods helped them get there.</p>

      <p>The better you are able to tailor your training to mirror the best performers in your field, the more effective your training is likely to be.</p>

      <p>In pretty much any area of human endeavor, people have a tremendous capacity to improve their performance, as long as they train in the right way.</p>
    </div>
  </li>
  <li>
    <div class="collapsible-header"><i class="fa fa-book" style="margin-top: 10px;"></i><p style="margin: 0; overflow: auto; overflow: auto; padding: 10px 0;">Principles of Deliberate Practice in the Job</p></div>
    <div class="collapsible-body" style="padding: 0 10px;">
      <p>The first step toward enhancing performance is to abandon the following, the belief that one's abilities are limited by one's genetically prescribed characteristic, that if you do something for long enough, you're bound to get better at it, and lastly that all it takes to improve is effort.</p>

      <p>The deliberate practice mindset is anyone can improve, but it requires the right approach.</p>

      <p>Training with immediate feedback either from a mentor or even a carefully designed computer program, can be an incredibly powerful way to improve performance.</p>

      <p>It is much easier to present knowledge to a large group of people than it is to set up conditions under which individuals can develop skills through practice. One result is that when college students enter the work world, they often find that they need a lot of time to develop the skills they need to do their job.</p>

      <p>The training should focus on doing rather than on knowing and, in particular, on bringing everyone's skills closer to the level of the best performers in a given area.</p>
    </div>
  </li>
  <li>
    <div class="collapsible-header"><i class="fa fa-book" style="margin-top: 10px;"></i><p style="margin: 0; overflow: auto; overflow: auto; padding: 10px 0;">Principles of Deliberate Practice in Everyday Life</p></div>
    <div class="collapsible-body" style="padding: 0 10px;">
      <p>Deliberate practice is for everyone who dreams. It's for all those people who want to take control of their lives and create their own potential.</p>

      <p>One of the main purpose of deliberate practice is to develop a set of effective mental representations that can guide performance. When you're practicing by yourself, you have to rely upon your own mental representation to monitor your performance and determine what you might be doing wrong. This is not impossible, but it is much more difficult and less efficient than having an experienced teacher watching you and providing feedback. Thus, one of the most important things you can do for your success is to find a good teacher and work with him or her.</p>

      <p>One of the most important things a teacher can do is to help you develop your own mental representations so that you can monitor and correct your own performance.</p>

      <p>You may need to change teachers as you yourself change.</p>

      <p>If your mind is wandering or you're relaxed and having fun, you probably won't improve. Whatever you are doing, focus on it. Learning to engage in consciously developing and refining your skills, is one of the most powerful ways to improve the effectiveness of your practice. It is better to train at 100 percent effort for less time than at 70 percent effort for a longer period.</p>

      <p>The internet offers just about everything except quality control, but you can get some good ideas and tips, try them out, and see what works best for you.</p>

      <p>Purposeful practice, it does no good to do the same thing over and over again mindlessly; the purpose on getting better in those areas, trying different methods to improve until you find something that works.</p>

      <p>To effectively practice a skill without a teacher, it helps to keep in mind three F's: Focus, Feedback, Fix it.</p>

      <p>This is true for everyone who faces a plateau, the best way to move beyond it is to challenge your brain or your body in a new way.</p>

      <p>What distinguished the most successful performers was their superior ability to remain committed to studying despite the boredom and the pull of other, more appealing activities.</p>

      <p>When you quit something that you had initially wanted to do it's because the reasons to stop eventually come to outweigh the reason to continue. Thus, to maintain your motivation you can either strengthen the reasons to keep going or weaken the reasons to quit.</p>

      <p>If you stop believing that you can reach a goal, either because you've regressed or you've plateaued, don't quit.</p>

      <p>One of the best ways to create and sustain social motivation is to surround yourself with people who will encourage and support and challenge you in your endeavors. Put together a group of people all interested in the same thing or join an existing group and use the group's camaraderie and shared goals as extra motivation in reaching your own goals.</p>

      <p>There is no reason not to follow your dream. Deliberate practice can open the door to a world of possibilities that you may have been convinced were out of reach. Open that door.</p>
    </div>
  </li>
  <li>
    <div class="collapsible-header"><i class="fa fa-book" style="margin-top: 10px;"></i><p style="margin: 0; overflow: auto; overflow: auto; padding: 10px 0;">The Road to Extraordinary</p></div>
    <div class="collapsible-body" style="padding: 0 10px;">
      <p>One of the hallmarks of expert performers is that even once they become one of the best of what they do, they still constantly strive to improve their practice techniques and to get better.</p>

      <p>Three stages that are common for experts with extraordinary abilities. First stage, children are introduced in a playful way to what will eventually become their field of interest. Once a future expert performer becomes interested and show some promise in an area, the typical next step is to take lessons from a coach or teacher. Generally when they're in their early or mid teens, the future experts make a commitment to becoming the best that they can be. This commitment is the third stage.</p>

      <p>The most important factor in the early days of an expert development, maintaining that interest and motivation while the skills and habits are being built.</p>

      <p>Self-selection process: that the only people who would spend years practicing something are whose who naturally love to do it, but it is also possible that the practice itself may lead to physiological adaptations that produce more enjoyment and more motivation to do that particular activity.</p>

      <p>There is a fourth stage of expert performance, where some people move beyond the existing knowledge in their field and make unique creative contribution.</p>

      <p>Creativity goes hand in hand with the ability to work hard and maintain focus over long stretches of time, exactly the ingredient of deliberate practice that produced their expert abilities in the first place.</p>

      <p>The creative, the restless, and the driven are not content with the status quo, and they look for ways to move forward, to do things that others have not. Progress is made by those who are working on the frontiers of what is known and what is possible to do, we must rely on the experts to move us forward.</p>
    </div>
  </li>
  <li>
    <div class="collapsible-header"><i class="fa fa-book" style="margin-top: 10px;"></i><p style="margin: 0; overflow: auto; overflow: auto; padding: 10px 0;">But What About Natural Talent?</p></div>
    <div class="collapsible-body" style="padding: 0 10px;">
      <p>The bottom line is that the extraordinary abilities are the product of much practice and training. The book GRIT by Angela Duckworth does a great job at explaining this, click <a href="https://jordanspencerwu.github.io/grit/" target="_blank">here</a> to see my notes.</p>
    </div>
  </li>
  <li>
    <div class="collapsible-header"><i class="fa fa-book" style="margin-top: 10px;"></i><p style="margin: 0; overflow: auto; overflow: auto; padding: 10px 0;">Where Do We Go from Here?</p></div>
    <div class="collapsible-body" style="padding: 0 10px;">
      <p>There is much that expert performers and aspiring expert performers can do to improve their training.</p>

      <p>Deliberate practice is all about the skills. you pick up the necessary knowledge in order to develop the skills; Knowledge should never be an end in itself.</p>

      <p>If you teach a student facts, concepts, and rules, those things go into long-term memory as individual pieces, and if a student then wishes to do something with them, use them to solve a problem, reason with them to answer a question, or organize and analyze them to come up with a theme or a hypothesis, the limitations of attention and short-term memory kick in. The student must keep all of these different unconnected pieces in mind while working with them toward a solution. However, if this information is assimilated as part of building mental representations aimed at doing something, the individual pieces become part of an interconnected pattern that provides context and meaning to the information, making it easier to work with. When you're done, not only have you developed an effective mental representation for the skill you were developing, but you have also absorbed a great deal of information connected with that skill.</p>

      <p>When teaching a skill, break the lesson into a series of steps that the student can master one at a time, building from one to the next to reach the ultimate objective.</p>

      <p>In almost any area of education the most useful learning objective will be those that help student develop effective mental representations.</p>

      <p>One benefit that a young student or anyone gets from developing mental representations is the freedom to begin exploring that skill on his or her own. Having students create mental representation in one area helps them understand exactly what it takes to be successful not only in that area but in others as well.</p>

      <p>People are not born with some innate talent, but rather because they have developed their abilities through years of practice, taking advantage of the adaptability of the human body and brain. We need to give people the tools they need to harness that adaptability and take control of their own potential, based on the principles of deliberate practice and aimed at creating more effective mental representations.</p>

      <p>The most important gifts we can give our children are the confidence in their ability to remake themselves again and again and the tools with which to do that job. They will need to see firsthand, through their own experiences of developing abilities they thought were beyond them, that they control their abilities and are not held hostage by some antiquated idea of natural talent. And they will need to be given the knowledge and support to improve themselves in whatever ways they choose.</p>
    </div>
  </li>
</ul>
