---
author: Cal Newport
categories: [book]
class: 20
date: 2017-01-06 10:00:00
description: The deep life is not for everyone, it requires hard work and drastic changes to your habits. It's about reducing shallow through habits and rituals. "If you're willing to sidestep these comforts and fears, and instead struggle to deploy your mind to its fullest capacity to create things that matter, then you'll discover, as others have before you, that depth generates a life rich with productivity and meaning."
hidden: true
img-path: /assets/images/books/deep-work.jpg
layout: book
libraries: [mathjax]
permalink: /deep-work/
title: "Deep Work"
---

<b>Deep Work:</b> Professional activities performed in a state of distraction-free concentration that push your cognitive capabilities to their limit. These efforts create new value, improve your skills, and are hard to replicate.

<b>Shallow Work:</b> Noncognitive demanding, logistical-style task, often performed while distracted. These efforts tend to not create much new value in the world and are easy to replicate.

Deep work is a skill that has great value today. There are two reasons for this value. The first has to do with learning, to remain valuable in our economy, you must master the art of quickly learning complicated things. The second reason that deep work is valuable is because the impacts of the digital network revolution cut both ways. If you can create something useful, its reachable audience is essentially limitless, which greatly magnifies your reward. On the other hand, if what you're producing is mediocre, then you're in trouble, as it's too easy for your audience to find a better alternative online. To succeed you have to produce the absolute best stuff you're capable of producing, a task that requires depth.

<b>The Deep Work Hypothesis:</b> The ability to perform deep work is becoming increasing rare at exactly the same time it is becoming increasing valuable in our economy. As a consequence, the few who cultivate the skill, and then make it the core of their working life, will thrive.

A commitment to deep work is not a moral stance and it's not a philosophical statement, it is instead a pragmatic recognition that the ability to concentrate is a skill that gets valuable things done.

##### Deep Work Is Valuable

There are two groups that are poised to thrive and are accessible: those who can work creatively with intelligent machines and those who are stars in their field. The core abilities for thriving in the new economy is the ability to quickly master hard things and the ability to produce at an elite level in terms of both quality and speed. These two abilities depend on your ability to perform deep work. Remember that a deep life is a good life.

To learn requires intense concentrations and deliberate practice. You must train your attention to focus tightly on a specific skill you're trying to improve or an idea you're trying to master. As you are mastering a skill, you receive feedback so you can correct your approach to keep your attention exactly where its most productive. To learn hard things quickly, you must focus intensely without distraction.

{% highlight java %}
  High-Quality Work Producted = (Time Spent) x (Intensity of Focus)
{% endhighlight %}

<b>Attention residue:</b> Task A to another Task B, your attention doesn't immediately follow, a residue of your attention remains stuck thinking about the original task.

To produce at your peak level, you need to work for extended periods with full concentration on a single task free from distraction, the type of work that optimizes your performance is deep work.

##### Deep Work Is Rare

<b>The Principle of Least Resistance:</b> In a business setting, without clear feedback on the impact of various behaviors to the bottom line, we will tend toward behaviors that are easiest in the moment.

<b>Busyness as Proxy for Productivity:</b> In the absence of clear indicators of what it means to be productive and valuable in their jobs, many knowledge workers turn back toward, an industrial indicator of productivity: doing lots of stuff in a visible manner.

##### Deep Work Is Meaningful

A deep life is not just economically lucrative, but also a life well lived. What we choose to focus on and what we choose to ignore, plays in defining the quality of our life. Our brains construct our worldview based on what we pay attention to. "Who you are, what you think, feel, and do, what you love, is the sum of what you focus on." If you spend enough time in a positive state, your mind will understand your world as a rich in meaning and importance, concentration so intense that there is no attention left over to think about anything irrelevant, or to worry about problems. I'll live the focused life, because it's the best kind there is.

Ironically jobs are actually easier to enjoy than free time, because like flow activities they have built-in goals, feedback rules, and challenges, all of which encourage one to become involved in one's work, to concentrate and lost oneself in it. Free time, on the other hand, is unstructured, and requires much greater effort to be shaped into something that can be enjoyed. Humans beings, it seems, are at their best when immersed deeply in something challenging.

The flow state is generated by the notations of stretching your mind to its limits, concentrating and losing yourself in an activity, all of which also describe deep work. To build your working life around the experience of flow produced by deep work is a proven path to deep satisfaction.

Craftsmanship provides a key to reopening a sense of sacredness in a responsible manner. A source of meaning sited outside the individual. The task of a craftsman, is not to generate meaning, but rather to cultivate in himself the skill of discerning the meaning that are already there. Your work is craft, and if you hone your ability and apply it with respect and care, then you can generate meaning in the daily efforts of your professional life.

##### Rule #1 Work Deeply

To work deeply you must turn your attention toward something more superficial. You have a finite amount of willpower that becomes depleted as you use it. The key to developing a deep work habit is to move beyond good intentions and add routines and rituals to our working life designed to minimize the amount of your limited willpower necessary to transition into and maintain a state of unbroken concentration.

You must carefully choose a philosophy that fits your specific circumstance.

<b>Monastic Philosophy:</b> to maximize deep efforts by eliminating or radically minimizing shallow obligations.

<b>Bimodal Philosophy:</b> ask that you divide your time, dedicating some clearly defined stretches to deep pursuits and leaving the rest open to everything else.

<b>Rhythmic Philosophy:</b> the easiest way to consistently start deep work session is to transform them into a simple regular habit.

<b>Journalist Philosophy:</b> you fit deep work where ever you can into your schedule.

The benefits of a ritual are that it provides your mind with the structure and commitment it needs to slip into the state of focus where you can begin to create things that matter.

<b>The Grand Gesture:</b> by leveraging a radical change to your normal environment, coupled perhaps with a significant investment of effort or money, all dedicated toward supporting a deep work task, you increase the perceived importance of the task.

<b>The Theory of Serendipitous Creativity:</b> when you allow people to bump into each other smart collaborations and new ideas emerges.

When pursuing innovation, collaborative deep work can yield better results. The key is to maintain in <b>hub and spoke style arrangement</b>: Expose yourself to ideas in hubs on a regular basis, but maintain a spoke in which to work deeply on what you encounter. When it comes to deep work consider the use of collaboration when appropriate, as it can push your results to a new level.

<b>Disruption:</b> Entrenched companies are often unexpectedly dethroned by start-ups that begin with cheap offering at the low end of the market, but then, over time, improve their cheap products just enough to begin to steal high-end market share.

<b>Deep Work:</b> the serious efforts that produce things the world values.

Regularly resting your brain improves the quality of your deep work. When you work, work hard. When you're done, be done. A key commitment for succeeding is your commitment to shutting down with a strict shutdown ritual that you use at the end of the workday to maximize the probability that you succeed.

Rule #1 taught you how to integrate deep work into your schedule and support it with routines and rituals designed to help you consistently reach the current limit of your concentration ability.

##### Rule #2 Embrace Boredom

Rule #2 will help you significantly improve your concentration ability by training yourself to address these two goals: improving your ability to concentrate intensely and overcoming your desire for distraction.

You cannot consider yourself as fulfilling this daily obligation unless you have stretched to the reaches of your mental capacity.

An important reality about deep work: The ability to concentrate intensely is a skill that must be trained.

It's common to treat undistracted concentration as a habit, something that we you know how to do and know is good for you, but that you've been neglecting due to a lack of motivation. Efforts to deepen your focus will struggle if you don't simultaneously wean your mind from a dependence on distraction. Once your brain has become accustomed to on-demand distraction, it's hard to shake the addiction even when you want to concentrate.

<b>The Internet Sabbath:</b> this ritual asks you to put aside regular time, typically, one day a week, where you refrain from network technology.

An alternative to the Internet Sabbath, instead of scheduling the occasional break from distraction so you can focus, you should instead schedule the occasional break from focus to give in to distraction. To simply wait and be bored has become a novel experience in modern life, but from the perspective of concentration training, it's incredibly valuable.

To succeed with deep work, you must rewire your brain to be comfortable resisting distracting stimuli. Deep work requires level of concentration well beyond where most knowledge workers are comfortable.

As in mindfulness meditation, you must continue to bring your attention back to the problem at hand when it wanders or stalls. By forcing you to resist distraction and return your attention repeatedly to a well-defined problem, it helps strengthen your distraction-resisting muscles, and by forcing you to push you focus deeper and deeper on a single problem, it sharpens your concentration. To succeed with productive meditation, it requires practice to do well.

##### Rule #3 Quit Social Media

Two important points about our cultures current relationship with social network like Facebook, Twitter, and Instagram. The first point is that we increasingly recognize that these tools fragment our time and reduce our ability to concentration. Willpower is limited, and therefore the more enticing tools you have pulling at your attention, the harder it'll be to maintain focus on something important. The second important point is the impotence with which knowledge workers currently discuss this problem of network tools and attention. Accept that these tools are not inherently evil, and that some of them might be vital to your success and happiness, but at the same time also accepting that the threshold for allowing a site regular access to your time and attention (not to mention personal data) should be much more stringent, and that most people should therefore be using many fewer such tools.

To master the art of deep, therefore, you must take back control of your time and attention from the many diversion that attempt to steal them.

<b>The Any-Benefit Approach to Network Tool Selection:</b> you're justified in using a network tool if you can identify any possible benefit to its use, or anything you might possibly miss out on if you don't use it.

There services are engineered to be addictive, robbing time and attention from activities that more directly support your professional and personal goals (such as deep work).

<b>The Craftsman Approach to Tool Selection:</b> identify the core factors that determine success and happiness in your professional and personal life. Adopt a tool if its positive impacts on these factors substantially outweigh its negative impacts.

Every tool has something useful to offer, at the same time, it offers negatives as well. Keep using a tool only if you concluded that it has substantial positive impacts and that these outweigh the negative impacts.

<b>The Law of the Vital Few:</b> in many settings, 80 percent of a given effect is due to just 20 percent of the possible causes.

The law of the vital few, reminds us that the most important 20 percent or so of these activities provide the bulk of the benefits. The law says that it's the top two or three such activities you focus on that make most of the difference in whether or not you succeed with the goal. The key point is that all activities, regardless of their importance, consume your same limited store of time and attention.

That you both should and can make deliberate use of your time outside work, which is to reduce the impact of network tools on your ability to perform deep work. Structured hobbies provide good fodder for these hours, as they generate specific actions with specific goals to fill your time. If you give your mind something meaningful to do throughout all your waking hours, you'll end the day more fulfilled, and begin the next one more relaxed, than if you instead allow your mind to bathe for hours in semiconscious and unstructured web surfing.

##### Rule #4 Drain the Shallows

<blockquote>
  Very few people work even 8 hours a day. You're lucky if you get a few good hours in between all the meetings, interruptions, web surfing, office polities, and personal business that permeate the typical workday.<br>
  <br>
  Fewer official working hours helps squeeze the fat out of the typical workweek. Once everyone has less time to get their stuff done, they respect that time even more. People become stringy with their time and that's a good thing. They don't waste it on things that just don't matter. When you have fewer hours you usually spend them more wisely.
</blockquote>

The shallow work that increasingly dominates the time and attention of knowledge workers is less vital than it often seem in the moment. The value of deep work vastly outweighs the value of shallow, but this doesn't mean that you must quixotically pursue a schedule in which all of your time is invested in depth. Once you've hit your deep work limit in a given day, you'll experience diminishing rewards if you try to cram in more.

We spend much of our day on autopilot, not giving much thought to what we're doing with our time. To take full advantage of the value of deep work, schedule every minute of your day. If your schedule is disrupted, you should at the next available moment, take a few minutes to create a revised schedule for the time that remains in the day. With structure, you can ensure that you regularly schedule blocks to grapple with a new idea, or work deeply on something challenging, or brainstorm for a fixed period, the type of commitment more likely to instigate innovation.

Recognition that a deep work habit requires you to treat your time with respect, decide in advance that you're going to do with every minute of your workday. If you want to approach your true potential as someone who creates things that matter.

By picking a shallow-to-deep ratio, you can replace this guilt-driven unconditional acceptance of the time you put aside for shallow work (therefore still exposing yourself to many opportunities), but keeping these efforts constrained to a small enough fraction of your time and attention to enable the deep work that ultimately drives your business forward.

<b>fixed-schedule productivity:</b> A firm goal of not working past a certain time, by ruthlessly reducing the shallow while preserving the deep and more careful thinking about our organizational habits.