---
author: Amy Cuddy
categories: [book]
class: 33
date: 2017-04-01 10:00:00
description: To be presence we have to feel powerful! One of the best way to achieve this feeling is by expanding our body, also known as power poses. No matter the situation, we can overcome our own fear, anxiety, and powerlessness by being presence.
hidden: true
img-path: /assets/images/books/presence.jpg
layout: book
permalink: /presence/
title: "Presence: Bringing your BOLDEST SELF to your BIGGEST CHALLENGES"
---

Presence stem from believing in and trusting yourself, your real, honest feelings, values, and abilities.

When we are present, we are passion, confidence, and comfortable enthusiasm.

Mindfulness: the ability to go through life with crystalline awareness and to fully inhabit our experience.

Presence is the state of being attuned to and able to comfortably express our true thoughts, feelings, values, and potential.

The more we are able to be ourselves, the more we are able to be present.

Focus less on the impression you're making on others and more on the impression you're making on yourself.

Fragile high self-esteem: their seemingly positive view of themselves depends on continuous external validation, a self-view that's based less in reality than it is on wishful thinking.

Secure high self-esteem is internal. People who have a solid sense of self-worth reflect that feeling through healthy, effective ways of dealing with challenges and relationships, making them both more resilient and more open.

In order for you to feel truly present, the various elements of the self, emotions, thoughts, physical, and facial expressions, behaviors must be in harmony.

When we are authentically expressing a genuine emotion, our nonverbal displays tend to follow predictable patterns.

Truth reveals itself more clearly through our actions than it does through our words.

"The body says what words cannot. The body never lies."

Presence is "when all your senses agree on one thing at the same time."

"We convince by our presence."

Pragmatic view: the authentic self is an experience, a state, not a trait. I think of it as the experience of knowing and feeling that you're being your most sincere and courageous self.

Physical and psychological adversity shape us.

It's not enough to identify the values, traits, and strengths that represent your authentic best self, you must then affirm and trust the answers. You must believe them.

Self-affirmation: reminding ourselves what matters most to us and, by extension, who we are.

Before heading into a situation where we may be challenged, we can reduce our anxiety by reaffirming the parts of our authentic best selves we value most.

Your boldest self emerges through the experience of having full access to your values, traits, and strengths, and knowing that you can autonomously and sincerely express them through your actions and interactions.

To be present, it's not enough to know who you are and express it to others, you need to act on it. A person must be attentive, connected, integrated, and focused.

"Just be yourself."

When you find your true presence, it is the strength to be there. To be there in a state of balance, because you're not trying to protect yourself. You just are.

"The key to presence is relaxation."

Preparation is obviously important, but at some point, you must stop preparing content and start preparing mind-set.

It seems that when you become present, you allow others to be present.

Presence with others is first about showing up.

Presence is the medium through which trust develops and ideas travel.

Presence give you the power to help others in their most challenging moments.

Listening is crucial to presence.

Imposter syndrome causes us to overthink and second-guess.

Imposter syndrome steals our power and suffocates our presence.

When we feel like imposters, we don't attribute our accomplishments to something internal and constant, such as talent or abilities; instead we credit something beyond our control, such as luck.

The impostor experience stops us from reacting in the moment, it keeps us from responding to the world as it truly exists.

Power activates a psychological and behavioral approach system. When we feel powerful, we feel free in control, unthreatened, and safe.

When we feel powerless, we cannot be present.

Social power is characterized by the ability to exert dominance, to influence or control the behavior of others.

Personal power is characterized by freedom from the dominance of others.

"Personal power is all about having the confidence to act based on one's own beliefs, attitudes, and values, and having the sense that one's actions will be effective."

Whether we feel powerful or powerless has huge consequences in our lives.

Spotlight effect: to feel that people are paying more attention to us then they actually are... and usually in a bad way, not a good way.

The more anxious and self-focused we are during an interaction, the more time we spend past-event processing, ruminating about the interaction, even days later. The thing we're ruminating about isn't even real, it's a seriously flawed memory of an interaction.

Power is a buffer against negative emotions, it seems to thicken our skin against judgement, rejection, stress, and even physical pain.

Feeling powerful can sometimes improve our ability to read and relate to other people.

People who feel powerful are also more likely to forgive others, especially those they feel committed to.

Power makes us fearless, independent, and less susceptible to outside pressures and expectations, allowing us to be more creative.

When we feel powerful, we're less self-conscious about expressing our feelings and beliefs, and that frees us to think and do great things.

Feeling powerful synchronizes our thoughts, feelings, and behaviors, bringing us closes to presence.

Feeling powerful gives us the freedom to decide, to act, to do.

When people process a strong belief that they will be able to perform the task at hand, they are more likely to perform it.

Having real-world power seem to protect us from anxiety.

The more personally powerful we feel, the likelier it is that we'll want to help others feel the same.

Personal power brings us closer to our best selves, while the lack of it distorts and obscures ourselves.

The path to personal power is also the path to presence.

Power causes us to see ourselves as taller than we actually are and others as smaller than they actually are.

When we feel powerful, we speak more slowly and take more time. We don't rush. We're not afraid to pause. We feel entitled to the time we're using.

When we are feeling powerless, in virtually every way that we can, we make ourselves smaller.

It's clear that thoughts and feelings shape body language and that each person's body language speaks to others.

Our body language is also speaking to us, to our own inner selves.

Decisions create confidence.

"I don't sing because I'm happy; I'm happy because I sing."

One of the primary ways we decode other's emotions is by automatically mimicking their facial expressions.

Be kind to your crow's feet, and they will be kind to you, and they will make it easier for you to be kind to others.

Feelings are the consequences... of emotional behavior and bodily response.

Our bodies don't just carry us where we want to go: they can help carry us to who we want to be.

Where our bodies lead, our mind and motions will follow.

Understanding that you can control your breathing is a first step to understanding how you can control your anxiety.

Your facial expressions, your postures, your breathing, all clearly affect the way you think, feel, and behave.

The way you carry yourself is a source of personal power, the kind of power that is key to presence. It's the key that allows you to unlock yourself, your abilities, your creativity, your courage, and even your generosity.

Expanding your body expands your mind, which allows you to be present.

The high-status person is looking at the world and the low-status person is looking at himself.

Speaking in an unhurried way allow us time to communicate clearly, without runaway social anxieties inhibiting us from presenting our true selves.

Expanding your body language, through posture, movement, and speech, makes you feel more confident and powerful, less anxious and self-absorbed, and generally more positive.

Expanding your body causes you to think about yourself in a positive light and to trust in that self-concept. It also clears your head, making space for creativity, cognitive persistence, and abstract thinking.

Expanding your body frees you to approach, act, and persist.

Expanding body language increases our feelings of physical strength and skill; contractive body language decreases them.

Expanding your body physiologically prepares you to be present; it overrides your instinct to fight or flee, allowing you to be grounded, open, and engaged.

Expanding our body toughens you to physical pain.

"Power should not be concentrated in the hands of so few and powerlessness in the hands of so many."

As important as it is to adopt bold power poses before challenging situations, it's just as important to maintain less bold but still strong, upright, and open postures during challenging situations.

It's important to avoid falling into the powerless poses we often mindlessly inhabit.

It's about approaching your biggest challenges without dread, executing them without anxiety, and leaving them without regret.

In each challenging situation, we nudge ourselves: we encourage ourselves to feel a little more courageous, to act a bit more boldly, to step outside the walls of our own fear, anxiety, and powerlessness.

Growth mind-set: a belief that they can improve in a given area.

When our body language is confident and open, other people respond in kind, unconsciously reinforcing not only their perception of us but also our perception of ourselves.

The more you reframe your anxiety as excitement, the happier and more successful you may become.

We have to like and respect ourselves.

What we wear can change how we see, feel, think, and behave.

With each self-nudge, pleasure builds upon pleasure, power upon power, and presence upon presence.

Ideal effect of presence: you execute with comfortable confidence and synchrony, and you leave with a sense of satisfaction and accomplishment, regardless of the measurable outcome.

Fake it till you become it.

"Don't fake it till you make it, fake it till you become it."

Dance your way to presence. Seize the large, beautiful, powerful parts of yourself, the ones you love and believe. They are, indeed, yours for the taking.