---
author: Seth Godin
categories: [book]
class: 31
date: 2017-03-21 10:00:00
description: Strategic quitting is about choosing the right things to quit and the right moment to do it. We don't have enough time in the world to chase all our dreams, we must determine which of the Dips are worth our time and energy. To be the best in the world, we focus on one Dip and quit the rest.
hidden: true
img-path: /assets/images/books/the-dip.jpg
layout: book
permalink: /the-dip/
title: "The Dip: A Little Book That Teaches You When to Quit (And When to Stick)"
---

<blockquote>
  Quit the wrong stuff.<br>
  Stick with the right stuff.<br>
  Have the guts to do one or the other.
</blockquote>

Winners win big because the marketplace loves a winner.

Scarcity makes being at the top worth something.

The Dip creates scarcity; scarcity creates value.

The Dip is the secret to your success. The people who set out to make it through the Dip, the people who invest the time and the energy and the effort to power through the Dip, those are the ones who become the best in the world.

If you can't make it through the Dip, don't start.

If you want to be a superstar, then you need to find a field with a steep Dip, a barrier between those who try and those who succeed. And you've got to get through that Dip to the other side.

##### Seven Reasons You Might Fail to Become the Best in the World

1. You run out of time (and quit).
2. You run out of money (and quit).
3. You get scared (and quit).
4. You're not serious about it (and quit).
5. You lost interest or enthusiasm or settle for being mediocre (and quit).
6. You focus on the short term instead of the long (and quit when the short term gets too hard).
7. You pick the wrong thing at which to be the best in the world (because you don't have the talent).

That's the goal of any competitor: to create a Dip so long and so deep that the nascent competition can't catch up.

If you're going to quit, quit before you start.

When faced with the Dip, most people suck it up and try to average their way to success. Instead, use the Dip as an opportunity to create something so extraordinary that people can't help but talk about it, recommend it, and yes; choose it.

Please understand this: If you're not able to get through the Dip in an exceptional way, you must quit. And quit right now.

Short-term pain has more impact on most people than long-term benefits do, which is why it's so important for you to amplify the long-term benefits of not quitting.

Quitting the projects that don't go anywhere is essential if you want to stick out the right ones.

If your job is a Cul-de-Sac (French for "dead end"), you have to quit or accept the fact that your career is over.

Strategic quitting is a conscious decision you make based on the choices that are available to you.

Coping is what people do when they try to muddle through. Quitting is better than coping because quitting frees you up to excel at something else.

Quitting as a short-term strategy is a bad idea. Quitting for the long term is an excellent idea.

<blockquote>
  Never quit something with great long term potential just because you can't deal with the stress of the moment.
</blockquote>

If pride is the only thing keeping you from quitting, if there's no Dip to get through, you're likely wasting an enormous amount of time and money defending something that will heal pretty quickly.

##### Three Questions to Ask Before Quitting

1. __AM I PANICKING?__ The best quitters, are the ones who decide in advance when they're going to quit. You can always quit later, so wait until you're done panicking to decide. The reason so many of us quit in the Dip is that without a compass or a plan, the easiest thing to do is to give up.

2. __WHO AM I TRYING TO INFLUENCE?__ Influencing one person is like scaling a wall. If you get over the wall the first few tries, you're in. If you don't, often you'll find that the wall gets higher with each attempt. Influencing a market, on the other hand, is more of a hill than a wall. You can make progress, one step at a time, and as you get higher, it actually gets easier.

3. __WHAT SORT OF MEASURABLE PROGRESS AM I MAKING?__ To stick with it in the absence of forward progress, is a waste. It's a waste because of the opportunity cost, you could be doing something far better, and far more pleasurable, with your time.

Write down under what circumstances you're will to quit. And when. And then stick with it.

If you've got as much as you've got, use it. Use it to become the best in the world. You can only do that by marshaling all of your resources to get through the biggest possible Dip. In order to get through that Dip, you'll need to quit everything else.
