---
author: Angela Duckworth
categories: [book]
class: 21
date: 2017-01-16 10:00:00
description: This book tells you the attributes of becoming successful in life. Live a life of meaning and purpose, focus on what matters in life and working towards your long-term goals. Becoming grittier will make you unstoppable, what doesn't kill you makes you stronger. Anyone can be gritty, it involves interest, practice, purpose, and hope.
hidden: true
img-path: /assets/images/books/grit.jpg
layout: book
permalink: /grit/
title: "GRIT - THE POWER of PASSION and PERSEVERANCE"
---

The highly successful had a kind of ferocious determination that played out in two ways. First, these exemplars were usually resilient and hardworking. Second, they knew in a very, very deep way what it was they wanted. They not only had determination, they had direction. It was this combination of passion and perseverance that made high achievers special. In a word, they had grit.

"For I have always maintained that, excepting fools, men did not differ much in intellect, only in zeal and hard work; and I still think this is an eminently important difference." Zeal and hard work are ultimately more important than intellectual ability.

Compared with what we ought to be, we are only half awake. Our fires are damped our drafts are checked. We are making use only a small part of our possible mental and physical resources.

"The human individual lives usually far within his limits; he possesses power of various sorts which he habitually fails to use. He energizes below his maximum, and he behaves below his optimum."

"The plain fact remains that men the world over possesses amounts of resource, which only very exceptional individual push to their extremes of use."

"In the most general sense, talent is the sum of a person's abilities, his or her intrinsic gifts, skills, knowledge, experience, intelligence, judgement, attitude, character, and drive. It also includes his or her ability to learn and grow."

When we can't easily see how experience and training get someone to a level of excellence that is so clearly beyond the norm, we default to labeling that person a "natural".

Great things are accomplished by those "people whose thinking is active in one direction, who employ everything as material, who always zealously observe their own inner life and that of others, who perceive everywhere models and incentives, who never tire of combining together the means available to them."

"The separation of talent and skills is one of the greatest misunderstood concepts for people who are trying to excel, who have dreams, who want to do things. Talent you have naturally. Skill is only developed by hours and hours and hours of beating on your craft."

"Grit is about working on something you care about so much that you're willing to stay loyal to it."

Grit has two components: passion and perseverance. Enthusiasm is common. Endurance is rare.

Passion acts like a compass, that thing that takes you some time to build, tinker with, and finally get right, and that then guides you on your long and winding road to where, ultimately you want to be.

Any successful person has to decided what to do in part by deciding what not to do. "A clear, well-defined philosophy give you the guidelines and boundaries that keep you on track."

Grit grows as we figure out our life philosophy, learn to dust ourselves off after rejection and disappointment, and learn to tell the difference between low level goals that should be abandoned quickly and higher level goals that demand more tenacity. The maturation story is that we develop the capacity for long term passion and perseverance as we get older.

"My advice for you is, figure out what you enjoy doing most in life, and then try to do it full time. Life is short. Follow your passion."

"Whatever it is that you want to do, you'll find in life that if you're not passionate about what it is you're working on, you won't be able to stick with it."

Passion for your work is a little bit of discovery, followed by a lot of development, and then a life time of deepening. Before hard work comes play.

<b>Interest</b>: the desire to learn new things, to explore the world, to seek novelty, to be on the lookout for change and variety.

Whatever our age, over time your role as a learner will become a more active and informed one. Over a period of years, your knowledge and expertise will grow, and along with it your confidence and curiosity to know more. Kaizen, continuous improvement.

Flow is performing at high levels of challenge and yet feeling "effortless", like you don't have to think about it, you're just doing it. Deliberate practice requires working where challenges exceed skill, and flow is most commonly experienced when challenge and skill are in balance. Remember deliberate practice is exceptionally effortful, and flow is, by definition, effortless. Gritty people do more deliberate practice and experience more flow.

"Even when the learning is hard, it is not bitter when you feel that is worth having that you can master it, that practicing what you learned will express who you are and help you achieve what your desire."

With deliberate practice, make it a habit/daily ritual, follow routines. They're creatures of habit.

<b>Purpose</b>: the intention to contribute to the well-being of others. Some of us care about purpose much more than we care about pleasure, and vice versa.

Gritter people are dramatically more motivated than others to seek a meaningful, other-centered life. Most gritty people see their ultimate aims as deeply connected to the world beyond themselves.

"A calling is not some fully formed thing that you find, it's much more dynamic. Whatever you do, whether you're a janitor or the CEO, you can continually look at what you do and ask how it connects to other people, how it connects to the bigger picture, how it can be an expression of your deepest values."

"When I am around people, my heart and soul radiate with the awareness that I am in the presence of greatness. Maybe greatness unfound, or greatness underdeveloped, but the potential or existence of greatness nevertheless, you never know who will go on to do good or even great things or become the next great influencer in the world, so treat everyone like they are the person."

One kind of hope is the expectation that tomorrow will be better than today. Grit depends on a different kind of hope. It rests on the expectation that our own efforts can improve our future.

When you keep searching for ways to change your situation for the better, you stand a chance of finding them.

growth mindset, you believe you can learn to do better.

"When you have setbacks and failures, you can't overreact to them. You need to step back, analyze them, and learn from them. But you also need to stay optimistic."

"Just keep working hard and learning, and it will all work out."

A fixed mindset about ability leads to pessimistic explanation of adversity, and that, in turn, leads to both giving up on challenges and avoiding them in the first place. In contrast, a growth mindset leads to optimistic ways of explaining adversity, and that, in turn, leads to perseverance and seeking out new challenges that will ultimately make you even stronger.

With practice and guidance, you can change the way you think, feel, and most important, act when the going gets rough.

"I've always had an instinctive sense that life and nature and evolution have planted in children their own capabilities, their own destiny. Like a plant, if they're fed and watered in the right way, they will grow up beautiful and strong. It's just a question of creating the right environment, a soil that is nurturing, that is listening and responsive to their needs. Children carry within them the seed of their own future. Their own interests will emerge if we trust them."

"You don't have to be a parent to make a difference in someone's life. If you just care about them and get to know what's going on, you can make an impact. Try to understand what's going on in their life and help them through that.

Following through on hard things teaches young person powerful, transferable lessons.

"There's a hard way to get grit and an easy way. The hard way is to do it by yourself. The easy way is to use conformity, the basic human drive to fit in, because if you're around a lot of people who are gritty, you're going to act grittier."

"Failure are going to happen, and how you deal with them may be the most important thing in whether you succeed."

"Use mistakes and problems as opportunities to get better, not reasons to quit."

What we accomplish in the marathon of life depends tremendously on our grit, our passion and perseverance for long term goals.

You can grow your grit. On your own from the <b>inside out:</b> You can develop a habit of daily challenge, exceeding, skill practice. You can connect your work to a purpose beyond yourself. And you can learn to hope when all seem lost. You can also grow your grit from the <b>outside in:</b> Parents, coaches, teachers, bosses, mentors, friends, developing your personal grit depends critically on other people.
