---
author: Grant Cardone
categories: [book]
class: 53
date: 2017-10-29 10:00:00
description: In order to get to our desired future, we must operate using the 10x rule. You must set targets that are 10 times what you think you want and then do 10 times what you think it will take to accomplish those targets. Remember, success is your duty, obligation, and responsibility!
hidden: true
img-path: /assets/images/books/the-10x-rule.jpg
layout: book
permalink: /the-10x-rule/
title: "THE 10X RULE"
---

In order to get to the next level of whatever you're doing, you must think and act in a wildly different way than you previously have been.

Success is the degree of measure of attaining some desired object or end.

This is the focus of the 10x Rule: You must set targets that are 10 times what you think you want and then do 10 times what you think it will take to accomplish those targets.

Success is an accumulation of events turning out well or desired outcomes being achieved.

A person who limits his or her potential success will limit what he or she will do to create it and keep it.

Never reduce a target. Instead, increase actions.

Remember, success is important, success is your duty, and there is no shortage of success.

You must never reduce success in your mind or in a conversation to something that doesn't matter; on the contrary, it is vital!

Treating success as an option is one of the major reasons why more people don't create it for themselves - and why most people don't even get close to living up to their full potential.

It is fairly common for people who don't get what they want to provide justifications - and even lie to themselves - by minimizing how valuable success is to them.

"The harder I work, the luckier I get."

Success always comes as a result of earlier actions, no matter how seemingly insignificant they are or how long ago they were taken.

Success must be approached from an ethical viewpoint. Success is your duty, obligation, and responsibility!

Success for anyone or any group is ultimately a positive contribution to all people and all groups as it provides validation of the possibilities to all.

Success is not something that happens to you; it's something that happens because of you and because of the actions you take.

To get where you want to go in life, you must adopt the view that whatever is going on in your world - good, bad, or nothing - is something caused by you.

Everything that happens in your life comes as a result of your own responsibility, not merely some outside force.

Once you start to approach every situation as someone who is acting - not being acted upon - you will start to have more control over your life.

Nothing happens to me; it happens because of me.

Regardless of which degree of action you operate in, they all require work in their own way.

If you don't create new problems, then you're not taking enough action.

It doesn't matter what you do - it does matter that your goals be to dominate your sector with actions, that are immediate, consistent, and persistent and at levels that no one else is willing to operate at or duplicate.

To dominate your sector, your goal, dream, or ambition, you must first dominate your every interest, thought, and consideration.

Most people make only enough effort for it to feel like work, whereas the most successful follow up every action with an obsession to see it through to a reward.

I suggest that you become obsessed about the things you want; otherwise, you are going to spend a lifetime being obsessed with making up excuses as to why you didn't get the life you wanted.

If you are not creating new problems for yourself, then you aren't taking enough action.

Overcommit: be all in, and take massive level of action followed up by massive amount of more actions.

Fear is actually a sign that you are doing what's needed to move in the right direction.

That criticisms and complaints are inevitable indications that you are growing as you should.

When you're building a business, your primary target is not customer satisfaction (yet); it is acquisition, referral, and loyalty and then more acquisition using the customers you've attained.

Customer acquisition is the primary target, followed by customer loyalty, followed by customers who spread the word about you.

"Your name is your most important asset."

Omnipresence - the goal of being everywhere at all times and at the same time - is exactly the kind of massive thinking that is missing from most people's expectation of themselves and their dreams.

Your name, brand, and reputation are your most valuable assets only if enough people know of them and use them.

Excuses are never the reason for why you did or didn't do something. They're just a revision of the facts that you make up in order to help yourself feel better about what happened (or didn't).

"If it is to be, it is up to me."

No one values a person who not only doesn't have the information but doesn't want to know the information.

One of the fastest and best ways to separate yourself from the masses is to establish yourself as someone who makes situations better, not worse.

To do something big, you have to embrace danger.

There is no shortage of actual money - only shortage of people creating wealth.

Successful people invest time, energy, and money in improving themselves.

Your success is limited to the ability of those around you.

You want to focus to some degree on now but keep most of your attention on the future you desire to create.

Act now and then keep acting with the knowledge that enough actions taken now will create the future.