---
author: Mihaly Csikszentmihalyi
categories: [book]
class: 26
date: 2017-02-19 10:00:00
description: Life is short. It's important to know thyself and to control our consciousness at every moment of time. Once you master the self, your life will be more enjoyable and meaningful. Remember this simple truth, that the control of consciousness determines the quality of life.
hidden: true
img-path: /assets/images/books/flow.jpg
layout: book
permalink: /flow/
title: "FLOW"
---

<ul class="collapsible popout" data-collapsible="expandable">
  <li>
    <div class="collapsible-header"><i class="fa fa-book" style="margin-top: 10px;"></i><p style="margin: 0; overflow: auto; overflow: auto; padding: 10px 0;">HAPPINESS REVISITED</p></div>
    <div class="collapsible-body" style="padding: 0 10px;">
      <p>Present general principles to transform boring and meaningless lives into ones full of enjoyment.</p>

      <p>Happiness is not something that happens. It does not depend on outside events, but, rather, on how we interpret them. Happiness is a condition that must be prepared for, cultivated, and defended privately by each person. People who learn to control inner experience will be able to determine the quality of their lives. We cannot reach happiness by consciously searching for it.</p>

      <p>Optimal experience: experience we feel when we are in control of our actions, master of our own fate.</p>

      <p>The best moments usually occur when a person's body or mind is stretched to its limits in a voluntary effort to accomplish something difficult and worthwhile.</p>

      <p>flow: the state in which people are so involved in an activity that nothing else seems to matter; the experience itself is so enjoyable that people will do it even at great, cost, for the sheer sake of doing it.</p>

      <p>Only direct control of experience, the ability to derive moment by moment enjoyment from everything we do, can overcome the obstacles to fulfillment.</p>

      <p>If a person does take the time out to reflect, the disillusionment returns: after each success, it becomes clearer that money, power, status, and possessions do not by themselves, necessarily add one iota to the quality of life.</p>

      <blockquote>
        If you are pained by external things, it is not they that disturb you, but your own judgement of them. And it is in your power to wipe out that judgement now.
      </blockquote>

      <p>The simple truth, that the control of consciousness determines the quality of life.</p>
    </div>
  </li>
  <li>
    <div class="collapsible-header"><i class="fa fa-book" style="margin-top: 10px;"></i><p style="margin: 0; overflow: auto; overflow: auto; padding: 10px 0;">THE ANATOMY OF CONSCIOUSNESS</p></div>
    <div class="collapsible-body" style="padding: 0 10px;">
      <p>The events that constitutes consciousness, the "things" we see, feel, think, and desire, are information that we can manipulate and use. Thus, we might think of consciousness as intentionally ordered information.</p>

      <p>The reflection consciousness provides in what we call our life: the sum of all we have heard, seen felt, hoped, and suffered from birth to death.</p>

      <p>Each of us has this freedom to control our subjective reality.</p>

      <p>The information we allow into consciousness becomes extremely important; it is, in fact, what determines the content and the quality of life.</p>

      <p>It takes attention to retrieve the appropriate reference from memory, to evaluate the event, and then to choose the right thing to do. The work of a person who is in control of consciousness is the ability to flow attention at will, to be oblivious to distractions, to concentrate for as long as it takes to achieve a goal, and not longer. And the person who can do this usually enjoys the normal course of everyday life.</p>

      <p>We create ourselves by how we invest in our consciousness. Memories, thoughts, and feeling are all shaped by how we use it. And it is an energy under our control, to do with as we please; hence, attention is our most important tool in the task of improving the quality of experience.</p>

      <p>The self is no ordinary piece of information, it contains everything else that has passed through consciousness: all the memories, actions, desires, pleasures, and pains are included in it.</p>

      <p>Attention shapes the self, and is in turn shaped by it.</p>

      <p>Psychic disorder: information that conflicts with existing intentions, or distracts us from carrying them out. We give this condition many names; pain, fear, rage, anxiety, or jealousy.</p>

      <p>The outside event appears in consciousness purely as information, without necessarily having a positive or negative value attached to it. It is the self that interprets that raw information in the context of its own interests, and determines whether it is harmful or not.</p>

      <p>A complex self is one that succeeds in combining these opposite tendencies. Differentiation implies a movement toward uniqueness, towards separating oneself from others. Integration refers to its opposite: a union with other people, with ideas and entities beyond the self.</p>
    </div>
  </li>
  <li>
    <div class="collapsible-header"><i class="fa fa-book" style="margin-top: 10px;"></i><p style="margin: 0; overflow: auto; overflow: auto; padding: 10px 0;">ENJOYMENT AND THE QUALITY OF LIFE</p></div>
    <div class="collapsible-body" style="padding: 0 10px;">
      <p>The reality is that the quality of life does not directly on what others think of us or on what we own. The bottom line is, rather, how we feel about ourselves and about what happens to us. To improve life one must improve the quality of experience.</p>

      <p>Enjoyment appears at the boundary between boredom and anxiety, when the challenges are just balanced with the person's capacity to act.</p>

      <p>Optimal experience: people become so involved in what they are doing that the activity becomes spontaneous, almost automatic; they stop being aware of themselves as separate from the actions they are performing.</p>

      <p>Unless a person learns to set goals and to recognize and gauge feedback in such activities, they will not enjoy them.</p>

      <p>The flow experience is good only in that it has the potential to make life more rich, intense, and meaningful; it is good because it increases the strength and complexity of the self.</p>

      <p>The task is to learn how to enjoy everyday life without diminishing other people's chances to enjoy theirs.</p>
    </div>
  </li>
  <li>
    <div class="collapsible-header"><i class="fa fa-book" style="margin-top: 10px;"></i><p style="margin: 0; overflow: auto; overflow: auto; padding: 10px 0;">THE CONDITIONS OF FLOW</p></div>
    <div class="collapsible-body" style="padding: 0 10px;">
      <p>Flow activity provides a sense of discovery, a creation feeling of transporting the person into a new reality.</p>

      <p>A condition that affects whether an optimal experience will occur or not: an individual's ability to restructure consciousness so as to make flow possible.</p>

      <p>When adversity threatens to paralyze us, we need to reassert control by finding a new direction in which to invest psychic energy, a direction that lies outside the reach of external forces.</p>

      <p>The source of strength under extreme adversity is a trait of "unselfconscious individualism," or a strongly directed purpose that is not self-seeking.</p>
    </div>
  </li>
  <li>
    <div class="collapsible-header"><i class="fa fa-book" style="margin-top: 10px;"></i><p style="margin: 0; overflow: auto; overflow: auto; padding: 10px 0;">THE BODY IN FLOW</p></div>
    <div class="collapsible-body" style="padding: 0 10px;">
      <p>Enjoyment does not depend on what you do, but rather on how you do it.</p>

      <p>To be enjoyable, a relationship must become more complex. To become more complex, the partners must discover new potentialities in themselves and in each other.</p>

      <p>That sexuality, like any other aspect of life, can be made enjoyable if we are willing to take control of it, and cultivate it in the direction of greater complexity.</p>

      <p>Giving up the self with its instincts, habits, and desires is so unnatural an act that only someone supremely in control can accomplish it.</p>

      <p>In every known culture, the ordering of sound in ways that please the ear has been used extensively to improve the quality of life. Listening to music wards off boredom and anxiety, and when seriously attended to, it can induce flow experience. As with anything else, to enjoy music one must pay attention to it.</p>

      <p>Plato believed that children should be taught music before everything else, in learning to pay attention to graceful rhythms and harmonies their whole consciousness would become ordered.</p>

      <p>Only through freely chosen discipline can life be enjoyed, and still kept within the bounds of reason. If a person learns to control his instinctual desire, not because he has to, but because he wants to, he can enjoy himself without becoming addicted.</p>
    </div>
  </li>
  <li>
    <div class="collapsible-header"><i class="fa fa-book" style="margin-top: 10px;"></i><p style="margin: 0; overflow: auto; overflow: auto; padding: 10px 0;">THE FLOW OF THOUGHT</p></div>
    <div class="collapsible-body" style="padding: 0 10px;">
        <p>Flow always involves the use of muscle and nerve on the one hand, and will, thought, and feeling on the other.</p>

        <p>All forms of mental flow depend on memory, either directly or indirectly.</p>

        <p>The person whose memory is stocked with patterns of information is autonomous and self-contained.</p>

        <p>It is less likely that one will become a bore when one is intrinsically motivated, with a genuine interest in the material, and a desire to control consciousness, rather than in controlling the environment.</p>

        <p>When a person has learned a symbolic system well enough to use it, she has established a portable, self-contained world within the mind.</p>

        <p>Without the capacity to provide its own information, the mind drifts into randomness. It is within each person's power to decide whether its order will be restored from the outside, in ways over which we have no control, or whether the order will be the result of an internal pattern that grows organically from our skills and knowledge.</p>

        <p>Writing gives the mind a disciplined means of expression. It is a way to analyze and understand experience, a self-communication that brings order to them.</p>

        <p>Having a record of the past can make great contribution to the quality of life.</p>

        <p>Specialization if for the sake of thinking better, and not an end in itself.</p>

        <p>Ideally, the end of extrinsically applied education should be the start of an education that is motivated intrinsically.</p>
    </div>
  </li>
  <li>
    <div class="collapsible-header"><i class="fa fa-book" style="margin-top: 10px;"></i><p style="margin: 0; overflow: auto; overflow: auto; padding: 10px 0;">WORD AS FLOW</p></div>
    <div class="collapsible-body" style="padding: 0 10px;">
      <p>"Work and love." It is true that if one finds flow in work, and in relations with other people, one is well on the way toward improving the quality of life as a whole.</p>

      <p>The quality of experience of people who play with and transform the opportunities in their surroundings, is clearly more developed as well as more enjoyable than that of people who resign themselves to live within the constraints of the barren reality they feel they cannot alter.</p>

      <p>Work transforms the worker from an animal guided by instincts into a conscious goal-directed, skillful person.</p>

      <p>The more a job inherently resembles a game, with variety, appropriate and flexible challenges clear goals, and immediate feedback, the more enjoyable it will be regardless of the worker’s level of development.</p>

      <p>On the job people feel skillful and challenged, and therefore feel more happy, strong, creative, and satisfied.</p>

      <p>People who learn to enjoy their work who do not waste their free time, end up feeling that their lives as a whole have become much more worthwhile.</p>

      <blockquote>
        The future will belong not only to the educated man, but to the man who is educated to use his leisure wisely.
      </blockquote>
    </div>
  </li>
  <li>
    <div class="collapsible-header"><i class="fa fa-book" style="margin-top: 10px;"></i><p style="margin: 0; overflow: auto; overflow: auto; padding: 10px 0;">ENJOYING SOLITUDE AND ANOTHER PEOPLE</p></div>
    <div class="collapsible-body" style="padding: 0 10px;">
      <p>The quality of life depends on two factors: how we experience work, and our relations with other people.</p>

      <p>Unless one learns to tolerate and even enjoy being alone, it is very difficult to accomplish any task that requires undivided concentration.</p>

      <p>An illness or other misfortune is less likely to break a person down if he or she can rely on the emotional support of others.</p>

      <p>People are the most flexible, the most changeable aspects of the environment we have to deal with.</p>

      <p>Therefore a person who learns to get along with others is to make a tremendous change for the better in quality of life as a whole.</p>

      <p>The ultimate test for the ability to control the quality of experience is what a person does in solitude, with no external demands to give structure to attention.</p>

      <p>To fill free time with activities that require concentration, that increase skills, that lead to a development of the self.</p>

      <p>A person who rarely gets bored, who does not constantly need a favorable external environment to enjoy the moment, has passed the test for having achieved a creative life.</p>

      <p>Learning to use time alone, instead of escaping from it, is especially important in our early years.</p>

      <p>One can survive solitude, but only if one finds ways of ordering attention that will prevent entropy from destructuring the mind.</p>

      <p>If being alone is seen as a chance to accomplish goals that cannot be reached in the company of others, then instead of feeling lonely, a person will enjoy solitude and might be able to learn new skills in the process.</p>

      <p>Unless a person learns to enjoy, much of life will be spent desperately trying to avoid its ill effects.</p>

      <p>A true friend is someone we can occasionally be crazy with, someone who does not expect us to be always true to form.</p>

      <blockquote>
        Reform yourself. That way there will be one less rascal in the world.
      </blockquote>

      <p>Those who try to make life better for everyone without having learned to control their own lives first usually end up making things worse all around.</p>
    </div>
  </li>
  <li>
    <div class="collapsible-header"><i class="fa fa-book" style="margin-top: 10px;"></i><p style="margin: 0; overflow: auto; overflow: auto; padding: 10px 0;">CHEATING CHAOS</p></div>
    <div class="collapsible-body" style="padding: 0 10px;">
      <p>Health, money, and other material advantages may or may not improve life. Unless a person has learned to control psychic energy, chances are such advantages will be useless.</p>

      <p>That a person who knows how to find flow from life is able to enjoy even situations that seem to allow only despair.</p>

      <p>The ability to take misfortune and make something good come of it is a very rare gift.</p>

      <blockquote>
        The good things which belong to prosperity are to be wished, but the good things that belongs to adversity are to be admired.
      </blockquote>

      <p>Of all the virtues we can learn no trait is more useful, more essential for survival, and more likely to improve the quality of life than the ability to transform adversity into an enjoyable challenge.</p>

      <p>The peak in the development of coping skills is reached when a young man or woman has achieved a strong enough sense of self, based on personally selected goals, that no external disappointment can entirely undermine who he or she is.</p>

      <p>Those who know how to transform a hopeless situation into a new flow activity that can be controlled will be able to enjoy themselves, and emerge strong from the ordeal.</p>

      <p>unselfconscious self-assurance: the implicit belief that their destiny was in their hands.</p>

      <p>Focusing attention on the world: People who know how to transform stress into enjoyable challenge spend very little time thinking about themselves.</p>

      <p>The discovery of new solution: Two ways to cope with a situation that creates psychic entropy. One is to focus attention on the obstacles to achieving one’s goals and then to move them out of the way, thereby restoring harmony in consciousness. The other is to focus on the entire situation, including oneself, to discover whether alternative goals may not be more appropriate, and thus different solution possible.</p>

      <p>A person must formulate new goals, and create a new flow activity for himself, or else he will waste his energies in inner turmoil.</p>

      <p>If one operates with unselfconscious assurance, and remains open to the environment and involved in it, a solution is likely to emerge.</p>

      <p>The "autotelic self" is one that easily translates potential threats into enjoyable challenges, and therefore maintains its inner harmony.</p>

      <h5>Rules for developing autotelic self</h5>

      <ol>
        <li>1. Setting goals</li>
        <li>2. Becoming immersed in the activity</li>
        <li>3. Paying attention to what is happening</li>
        <li>4. Learning to enjoy immediate experience</li>
      </ol>
    </div>
  </li>
  <li>
    <div class="collapsible-header"><i class="fa fa-book" style="margin-top: 10px;"></i><p style="margin: 0; overflow: auto; overflow: auto; padding: 10px 0;">THE MAKING OF MEANING</p></div>
    <div class="collapsible-body" style="padding: 0 10px;">
      <p>If we enjoyed work and friendships, and faced every challenge as an opportunity to develop new skills, we would be getting rewards out of living that are outside the realm of ordinary life.</p>

      <p>As long as it provides clear objectives, clear rules for actions, and a way to concentrate and become involved, any goal can serve to give meaning to a person's life.</p>

      <p>Many of us have to discover a goal that will give meaning to life on our own, without the help of a traditional faith.</p>

      <p>People who find their lives meaningful usually have a goal that is challenging enough to take up all their energies, a goal that can give significance to their lives.</p>

      <p>Someone who is in harmony no matter what he does, no matter what is happening to him, knows that his psychic energy is not being wasted on doubt, regret, guilt, and fear, but is always usefully employed.</p>

      <p>We must invest energy in recognizing, understanding, and finding ways to adapt to the forces beyond the boundaries of our own individuality.</p>

      <p>No goal can have much effect unless taken seriously. Each goal prescribes a set of consequences, and if one isn't prepared to reckon with them, the goal becomes meaningless.</p>

      <p>if goals are well chosen, and if we have the courage to abide by them despite opposition, we shall be so focused on the actions and events around us that we won't have the time to be unhappy.</p>

      <p>The challenge for us is to create harmony based on reason and choice. Life theme is the goal-directed actions that provide shape and meaning to an individual's life.</p>

      <p>People discovered life theme in many cases a reaction to a great personal hurt suffered in early life, to being orphaned, abandoned, or treated unjustly. But what matters is not the trauma per se; the external event never determines what the theme will be. What matters is the interpretation that one places on the suffering.</p>

      <p>Many people confronted with the randomness of existence have drawn hope from the knowledge that others before them had faced similar problems, and had been able to prevail.</p>

      <p>The most promising faith for the future might be based on the realization that the entire universe is a system related by common laws and that it makes no sense to impose our dreams and desires on nature without taking them into account.</p>
    </div>
  </li>
</ul>