---
author: Sam Harris
categories: [book]
class: 39
date: 2017-05-29 12:00:00
description: Lying doesn't benefit anyone! To be our authentic self we must always be honest and tell the truth under all circumstances.
hidden: true
img-path: /assets/images/books/lying.jpg
layout: book
permalink: /lying/
title: "Lying"
---

"white" lie: those lies we tell for the purpose of sparing people discomfort. They tend to be the only lies that good people tell while imagining that they are being good in the process.

We often behave in ways that are guaranteed to make us unhappy.

The endless forms of suffering and embarrassment could be easily avoided by simply telling the truth.

To lie is to intentionally mislead others when they expect honest communication.

To speak truthfully is to accurately represent one's beliefs.

The intent to communicate honestly is the measure of truthfulness.

We know that trust is deeply rewarding and that deception and suspicion are two side of the same coin.

Honest people are a refuge: You know they mean what they say; you know they will not say one thing to your face and another behind your back; you know they will tell you when they think you have failed and for this reason their praise cannot be mistaken for mere flattery.

Sincerity, authenticity, integrity, mutual understanding, these and other sources of moral wealth are destroyed the moment we deliberately misrepresent our beliefs, whether or not our lies are ever discovered.

False encouragement is a kind of theft: It steal time, energy, and motivation that a person would put toward some other purpose.

One of the greatest problems for the liar is that he must keep track of his lies. When you tell the truth, you have nothing to keep track of.

To lie is to erect a boundary between the truth we are living and the perception others have of us.

Lying is, almost by definition, a refusal to cooperate with others. It is both a failure of understanding and an unwillingness to be understand.