---
author: Michael A. Singer
categories: [book]
class: 30
date: 2017-03-19 10:00:00
description: This book is about freeing yourself to live a happier life. Unconditional happiness means to choose to be happy not matter what happens. All we have to do is enjoy and learn from our experiences. Remember nothing in life is worth closing your heart or mind. 
hidden: true
img-path: /assets/images/books/the-untethered-soul.jpg
layout: book
permalink: /the-untethered-soul/
title: "The Untethered Soul: The Journey Beyond Yourself"
---

##### The Voice Inside Your Head

The best way to free yourself from this incessant chatter is to step back and view it objectively. Just view the voice as a vocalizing mechanism that is capable of making it appear like someone is in there talking to you. There is nothing more important to true growth than realizing that you are not the voice of the mind, you are the one who hears it. The truth is that most of life will unfold in accordance with forces far outside your control, regardless of what your mind says about it. Eventually you will see that the real cause of problems is not life itself. It's the commotion the mind makes about life that really causes problems. When you're just thinking, you're free to create whatever thoughts you want in your mind. This inner world is an alternate environment that is under your control. This mental manipulation of the outer experience allows you to buffer reality as it comes in. Your consciousness is actually experiencing your mental model of reality, not reality itself. True personal growth is about transcending the part of you that is not okay and needs protection. Come to know the one who watches the voice, and you will come to know one of the great mysteries of creation.

##### Your Inner Roommate

The bottom line is, you'll never be free of problems until you are free from the part within that has so many problems. If you want to achieve peace in the face of your problems, you must understand why you perceive a particular situation as a problem. When a problem is disturbing you, ask, "What part of me is being disturbed by this?" Once you clearly see the disturbed part, then ask, "Who is it that sees this? Who notices this inner disturbance?" This act of maintaining objective awareness of the inner problem is always better than losing yourself in the outer situation. The only real solution is to take the seat of witness consciousness and completely change your frame of reference. The first problem you have to deal with is your own reaction. This involves a change from "outer solution consciousness" to "inner solution consciousness." The only permanent solution to your problems is to go inside and let go of the part of you that seems to have so many problems with reality. There are two distinct aspects of your inner being. The first is you, the awareness, the witness, the center of your willful intentions; and the other is that which you watch. Once you've made the decision to free yourself from the mental melodrama, you are ready for teaching and techniques.

##### Who Are You?

To attain inner freedom one must continuously and sincerely ask the question "Who am I?" You're not the outside world. You're the one who is inside looking out at that world. The same "me" experiences both the outside world and the inside emotions. Eventually, you will get to a point within yourself where you realize that you, the experiencer, have a certain quality. And that quality is awareness, consciousness, and intuitive sense of existence. "I am the one who sees. From back in here somewhere, I look out, and I am aware of the events, thoughts, and emotions that pass before me." You are in your center of consciousness, that center is the seat of Self.

##### The Lucid Self

When you are an aware being, you no longer become completely immersed in the events around you. Instead, you remain inwardly aware that you are the one who is experiencing both the events and the corresponding thoughts and emotions. The consciousness has the ability to selectively focus awareness on specific objects. When you are in this lost state, you get so totally absorbed in the objects of thoughts, feelings, and the senses, that you forget the consciousness. The lost soul is the consciousness that has dropped into place where one human's thoughts, emotions, and sensory perceptions of sight, sound, taste, touch, and smell are all synchronized. Then the consciousness makes the mistake of focusing on that one spot too closely. It no longer knows itself as itself. It knows itself as the objects it is experiencing. In other words, you think you are the sum of your learned experience. When you are a centered being, however, your consciousness is always aware of being conscious. Your awareness of being is independent of the inner and outer objects you happen to be aware of. Once you become conscious of the consciousness itself, you are now aware of who you are. The more you are willing to just let the world be something you're aware of, the more it will let you be who you are, the awareness, the Self, the Atman, the Soul.

##### Infinite Energy

Every movement of your body, every emotion you have, and every thought that passes through your mind is an expenditure of energy. This is a source of energy you can draw upon from inside. You have a phenomenal amount of energy inside of you and it doesn't come from food and it doesn't come from sleep. The only reason you don't feel this energy all the time is because you block it. When you close your heart, or close your mind, you hide in the darkness within you. The heart is an energy center, and it can open or close. When energy can't flow in, there's darkness. You have a wellspring of beautiful energy inside of you. When you are open, you feel it; when you are closed, you don't. We are programmed based upon our past impressions such that all kinds of things can cause us to open and close. What you'll find is that the only thing you really want from life is to feel enthusiasm, joy, and love. If you can feel that all the time, then who cares what happens outside? If you make lists of how the world must be for you to open, you have limited your openness to those conditions. Better to be open no matter what. Do not let anything that happens in life be important enough that you're willing to close your heart over it. The most important thing in life is your inner. Remember, if you love life, nothing is worth closing over.

##### The Secrets of the Spiritual Heart

Your heart is an instrument made of extremely subtle energy that runs your life. You are the experiencer of your heart. The heart is an energy center, an area within your being through which your energy focuses, distributes, and flows. The heart closes because it becomes blocked by stored, unfinished energy patterns from your past. As events take place in this world, they come in through your senses and have an impact on your inner state of being. But if the energy pattern that are coming into your psyche create disturbance, you will resist them and not allow them to pass through you. When you do this, the energy patterns actually get blocked within you. What it means to live life is to experience the moment that is passing through you, and then experience the next moment, and then the next. If you could live in this state, you would be a fully aware being. Long term, the energy patterns that cannot make it through you are pushed out of the forefront of the mind and held until you are prepared to release them. When you are unable to allow life's events to pass through you, they stay inside and become a problem. The point is that past impressions do get stimulated, even old ones, and they affect your life. What is happening is that unfinished mental and emotional energy patterns are getting stored and reactivated. The only impressions that get blocked are those that cause either problems or some extraordinary sense of enjoyment. The alternative is to enjoy life instead of clinging to it or pushing it away. Simply allow the experiences of life to come in and pass through your being. If old energies come back up because you were unable to process them before, let go of them now.

##### Transcending the Tendency of Close

Our major struggles end up being with our inner fears, insecurities, and destructive behaviors patterns. When you close down and protect yourself, you are pulling a shell around the part of you that is weak. You are protecting your ego, your self-concept. You feel the need to protect yourself when you've experience disturbance, fear, insecurity, and danger. You will get to a point in your growth where you understand that if you protect yourself, you will never be free. The reward for not protecting your psyche is liberation. You are free to walk through this world without a problem on your mind. A thought or emotion emerges, you notice it, and it passes by because you allow it to. A wise person remains centered enough to let go every time the energy shifts into a defensive mode. No matter what events take place in life, it always better to let go rather than to close.

##### Let Go Now or Fall

People don't understand that fear is a thing. It's just another object in the universe that you are capable of experiencing. You can do one of two things with fear: you can recognize that you have it and work to release it, or you can keep it and try to hide from it. Your definitions of desirable and undesirable, as well as good and bad, all come about because you have defined how things need to be in order for you to be okay. Life is not under your control, it's continuously changing, and if you're trying to control it, you'll never be able to fully live it. If you had no fear, you could be perfectly happy living in this world. You'd be willing to face everything and everyone because you wouldn't have fear inside of you that could cause you disturbance. You only have to be willing to open your heart in the face of anything and everything, and permit that purification process to take place. No matter what it is, let it go.

##### Removing Your Inner Thorn

In order to grow, you must give up the struggle to remain the same, and learn to embrace change at all times. Real transformation begins when you embrace your problems as agents for growth. If you don't solve the root cause of the problem, but instead, attempt to protect yourself from the problem, it ends up running your life. Ultimately, if there is something disturbing inside of you, you have to make a choice. You can compensate for the disturbance by going outside in an attempt to avoid feeling it, or you can simply remove the thorn and not focus your life around it. The more you sit in the Self, the more you will begin to feel an energy that you have never experienced before. It comes up from behind, rather than in front where you experience your mind and emotion. Awareness does not fight; awareness releases.

##### Stealing Freedom for Your Soul

The prerequisite to true freedom is to decide that you do not want to suffer anymore. You must decide that you want to enjoy your life and that there is no reason for stress, inner pain, or fear. Your inner sensitivities expose you to a minute to minute, constant situation in which you are suffering to one degree or another. You are either trying to stop suffering, controlling your environment to avoid suffering, or worrying about suffering in the future. To end suffering, you must first realize that your psyche is not okay. The act of constantly worrying about yourself is a form of suffering. Success means you never have to think about your psyche again. You should never have to figure out how to be okay, or how not to be scared, or how to feel loved. You could just live and experience your life, instead of trying to use life to fix what's wrong inside of you. The truth is, everything will be okay as soon as you are okay with everything. The mind runs because you are giving it the power of your attention. Withdraw your attention, and the thinking mind falls away.

##### Pain, the Price of Freedom

One of the essential requirements for true spiritual growth and deep personal transformation is coming to peace with pain. Once you can face your disturbances, you will realize that there is a layer of pain seated deep in the core of your heart. This pain is so uncomfortable, so challenging, and so destructive to the individual self, that your entire life is spent avoiding it. Your entire personality is built upon ways of being, thinking, acting, and believing that were developed to avoid this pain. Real growth, takes place when you finally decide to deal with the pain. Inner pain is always there, underneath, hidden by the layers of our thoughts and emotions. We feel it most when our hearts go into turmoil, like when the world does not meet our expectations, this is psychological pain. The choice is to decide that you don’t want to spend your entire life avoiding the inner pain; you'd rather get rid of it. To live with freedom, you must learn to not to be afraid of inner pain and disturbance. If you want to grow and be free to explore life, you cannot spend your life avoiding the myriad things that might hurt your heart or mind. If life does something that causes a disturbance inside of you, instead of pulling away, let it pass through you like the wind. In truth, pain is the price of freedom. And the moment you are willing to pay that price, you will no longer be afraid. The moment you are not afraid of the pain, you'll be able to face all of life's situations without fear. Spiritual growth exists in the moment when you are consciously willing to pay the price of freedom. You must be willing at all times, in all circumstance, to remain conscious in the face of pain and to work with your heart by relaxing and remaining open. When you are comfortable with pain passing through you, you will be free.

##### Taking Down the Walls

You are inside a house, totally sealed off from natural light, and the house is sitting in the middle of an open field full of brilliant light. Your house is made of your thoughts and emotions. The walls are made of your psyche. That's what the house is. It is all your past experiences; all your thoughts and emotions; all the concepts, views, opinions, beliefs, hopes, and dreams that you have collected around yourself. This mental structure completely blocks you from whatever natural light is on the outside of its walls. When you approach the barrier areas of your thoughts and emotions, it feels like going into an abyss. It is often said that you must go through the darkest night in order to get to the infinite light. You must realize that when you defend yourself, you are really defending your walls. There is just your awareness of being and the limited house you built to live in. What you are defending is the house you built to protect yourself. You are hiding inside. You can get out simply by letting everyday life take down the walls you hold around yourself.

##### Far Far Beyond

Your views, your opinions, your preferences, your concepts, your goals, and your beliefs are all ways of bringing the infinite universe down to the finite where you can feel a sense of control. This mental model has become your reality. You must now struggle day and night to make the world fit your model, and you label everything that doesn't fit as wrong, bad, or unfair. If you want to go beyond your model, you have to take a risk of not believing in it. Going beyond always means letting go of the effort to keep things within your defined limits. So, there are two ways you can live: you can devote your life to staying in your comfort zone, or you can work on your freedom. The soul is infinite. It is free to expand everywhere. It is free to experience all of life. This can only happen when you are willing to face reality without mental boundaries. When you approach the edge of your cage you feel insecurity, jealousy, fear, or self-consciousness. You pull back, and if you are like most people, you stop trying. Spirituality begins when you decide that you'll never stop trying. You end up loving your edges because they point your way to freedom. All you have to do is constantly relax and lean into them. Then one day, when you least expect it, you fall through into the infinite.

##### Letting Go of False Solidity

As you go deeper into yourself, you will naturally come to realize that there is an aspect of your being that is always there and never changes. This is your sense of awareness, your consciousness. This is the root of Self. You are not your thoughts; you are aware of your thoughts. You are not your emotions; you feel your emotions. You are not your body; you look at it in the mirror and experience this world through its eyes and ears. You are the conscious being who is aware that you are aware of all these inner and outer things. You will never find yourself in what you have built to define yourself. If you dare to look, you will see that you live your entire life based on the model you built around yourself. You just have to take the risk of letting it all go and daring to face the fear that was driving you. You are the one who is in there doing all this, seeing all this, and experiencing all this. You do not have to cling to your experiences in the name of building yourself. When you become truly spiritual, you are totally different from everyone else. You must learn to be comfortable with psychological disturbance. When you've let go of the dark psyche, and you've let go of the light psyche, and you're no longer clinging to anything, you will reach a point where it will all open up behind you. You now become aware of a universe behind your seat of consciousness.

##### The Path of Unconditional Happiness

You have to realize that you really only have one choice in this life. Do you want to be happy, or do you not want to be happy? Once you make that choice, your path through life becomes totally clear. Any condition you create will limit your happiness. Unconditional happiness means you choose to be happy regardless of what happens. The purpose of your life is to enjoy and learn from your experiences. Events don't determine whether or not you're going to be happy. You determine whether or not you're going to be happy. If you learn to stay open at all times, great things will happen to you. The key is to learn to keep your mind disciplined enough so that it doesn't trick you into thinking that this time it's worth closing.

##### The Spiritual Path of Non-Resistance

One should view their spiritual work as learning to live life without stress, problems, fear, or melodrama. If you're neither pushing life away, nor pulling it toward you, then you are not creating any resistance. If you choose to live this way, you will see that life can be lived in a state of peace. It is not life's events that are causing problems or stress. It is your resistance to life's events that are causing this experience. It is actually possible to never have another problem for the rest of your life. This is because events are not problems; they're just events. Your resistance to them is what cause the problem. You just deal with them as events that are taking place on the planet Earth, and not as personal problems. Letting go of yourself is the simplest way to get closer to others. The key is to just relax and release, and deal only with what's left in front of you.

##### Contemplating Death

It is truly a great cosmic paradox that one of the best teachers in all of life turns out to be death. No person or situation could ever teach you as much as death has to teach you. A wise being completely and totally embraces the reality, the inevitability, and the unpredictability of death. It shouldn't take death to challenge you to live at your highest level. A wise person affirms, "If with one breath all of this can change, then I want to live at the highest level while I'm alive. I'm going to stop bothering the people I love. I'm going to live life from the deepest part of my being." You have to be willing to look at what it would be like if death was staring you in the face. Then you have to come to peace within yourself so that it doesn't make any difference whether it is or not. Let this knowledge help you to live every moment of your life fully, because every moment matters. The beauty of embracing deep truths is that you don't have to change your life; you just change how you live your life. So, start using every day to let go of that scared part of you that won't let you live life fully. Learn to live as though you are facing death at all times, and you'll become bolder and more open. There is no reason to be afraid of life. And the fear will fade once you understand that the only thing there is to get from life is the growth that comes from experiencing it. The highest way to learn is to take each moment of your life and realize that what matters is to live it fully. Death is giving meaning to your life. The wise realize that in the end, life belongs to death. This is how to live your life. You live it as though you were on the verge of death, because you are.