---
author: Susan Cain
categories: [book]
class: 40
date: 2017-06-11 10:00:00
description: The American culture is dominated by the Extrovert Ideal, stating that frame and riches are given to extroverts. This book shows you the power of being quiet, that introversion has traits that can produce great leaders. Everyone is a mix of extroversion and introversion and it's what makes our personality unique.
hidden: true
img-path: /assets/images/books/quiet.jpg
layout: book
permalink: /quiet/
title: "Quiet: The Power of Introverts in a World That Can't Stop Talking"
---

Introverts are drawn to the inner world of thought and feeling. Extroverts to the external life of people and activities.

We perceive talkers as smarter than quiet types: even though grade-point averages and SAT and intelligence test scores reveal this perception to be inaccurate.

The "Bus to Abilene" anecdote reveals our tendency to follow those who initiate action, any action.

Introvert leader are quiet, humble, modest, reserved, shy, gracious, mild mannered, self-effacing, and understated.

Extroverts are better with passive employee while introverts are better with proactive employee.

Introverts are uniquely good at leading initiative-takers because of their inclination to listen to others and lack of interest in dominating social situations, introverts are more likely to hear and implement suggestions.

<blockquote>
  Most inventors and engineers I’ve met are like me — they’re shy and they live in their heads. They’re almost like artists. In fact, the very best of them are artists. And artists work best alone — best outside of corporate environments, best where they can control an invention’s design without a lot of other people designing it for marketing or some other committee. I don’t believe anything really revolutionary has ever been invented by committee… I’m going to give you some advice that might be hard to take. That advice is: Work alone… Not on a committee. Not on a team.<br>
  <br>
  Stephen Wozniak
</blockquote> 

Everyone can learn from: introverts prefer to work independently, and solitude can be a catalyst for innovation.

Only when you're alone that you can engage in Deliberate Practice.

Personality is the complex brew that emerges after cultural influence and personal experience are thrown into the mix.

High reactivity is one biological basis of introversion.

We want to believe that we - as adults - can shape ourselves and make what we will of our lives.

We can stretch our personalities, but only up to a point. Our inborn temperament influences us, regardless of the lives we lead. A sizable part of who are is ordained by our genes, by our brains, by our nervous systems.

We have free will and can use it to shape our personalities.

A reward sensitive person is highly motivated to seek rewards.

Introvert also seem to be better than extroverts at delaying gratification, a crucial life skill associated with everything from higher SAT scores and income to lower body mass index.

Flow often occurs when people become independent of the social environment to the degree that they no longer respond exclusively in terms of its rewards and punishments.

If you’re an introvert, find your flow by using your gifts. You have the power of persistence, the tenacity to solve complex problems, and the clear-sightedness to avoid pitfalls that trip others up. You enjoy relative freedom from the temptations of superficial prizes like money and status.

Talk is for communicating need-to-know information; quiet and introspection are signs of deep thought and higher truth.

Aggressive power beats you up; soft power wins you over.

<blockquote>
  A man has many social selves as there are distinct groups of persons about whose opinion he cares. He generally shows a different side of himself to each of these different groups.<br>
  <br>
  William James
</blockquote>

Introverts are capable of acting like extroverts for the sake of work they consider important, people they love, or anything they value highly.

Self-monitors are highly skilled at modifying their behavior to the social demands of a situation.

Three key steps to identifying your own core personal project. First, think back to what you loved to do when you were a child. Second, pay attention to the work you gravitate to. Finally, pay attention to what you envy.

<blockquote>
  People who tend to suppress their negative emotion regularly might start to see the world in a more negative light.
</blockquote>

Big Five traits: Introversion - Extroversion; Agreeableness; Openness to Experience; Conscientiousness; and Emotionality Stability.

The introverts desperately craving downtime and understanding from their partners, the extroverts longing for company, and resentful that others seemed to benefit from their partner's "best" selves.