---
categories: [introduction-to-algorithms-elementary-data-structures]
date: 2016-09-26 11:00:00
hidden: true
layout: book-notes
libraries: [mathjax]
permalink: /queues/
title: "Queues"
---

In a __queue__, the element deleted is always the one that has been in the set for the longest time: the queue implements a __first-in, first-out__, or __FIFO__, policy. We call the __INSERT__ operation on a queue __ENQUEUE__, and we call the __DELETE__ operation __DEQUEUE__.

> The FIFO property of a queue causes it to operate like a line of customers waiting to pay a cashier. The queue has a __head__ and a __tail__. When a element is enqueued, it takes its place at the tail of the queue, just as a newly arriving customer takes a place at the end of the line. The element dequeued is always the one at the head of the queue, like the customer at the head of the line who has waited the longest.

One way to implement a queue of at most $n - 1$ elements using an array $Q[1..n]$. The queue has an attribute $Q.head$ that indexes, or points to, its head. The attribute $Q.tail$ indexes the next location at which a newly arriving element will be inserted into the queue. The elements in the queue reside in the locations $Q.head, Q.head + 1, ..., Q.tail-1$. When $Q.head = Q.tail$, the queue is empty, initially we have $Q.head = Q.tail = 1$.

If we attempt to dequeue an element from an empty queue, the queue __underflows__. When $Q.head = Q.tail + 1$, the queue is full, and if we attempt to enqueue an elment, then the queue __overflows__.

> Each operation takes takes $\Theta(1)$.

##### ENQUEUE(Q,x)

{% highlight java %}
  Q[Q.tail] = x
  if Q.tail == Q.length
    Q.tail = 1
  else Q.tail = Q.tail + 1
{% endhighlight %}

##### DEQUEUE(Q)

{% highlight java %}
  x = Q[Q.head]
  if Q.head == Q.length
    Q.head = 1
  else Q.head = Q.head + 1
  return x
{% endhighlight %}