---
categories: [introduction-to-algorithms-elementary-data-structures]
date: 2016-09-26 10:00:00
hidden: true
layout: book-notes
libraries: [mathjax]
permalink: /stacks/
title: "Stacks"
---

In a __stack__, the element deleted from the set is the one most recently inserted: the stack implements a __last-in, first-out__, or __LIFO__.

The __INSERT__ operation on a stack is often called __PUSH__, and the __DELETE__ operation, which does not take an element argument, is often called __POP__.

> These names are allusions to physical stacks, such as the spring-loaded stacks of plates used in cafeterias. The order in which plates are popped from the stack is the reverse of the order in which they were pushed onto the stack, since only the top plate is accessible.

We can implement a stack of at most $n$ elements with an array $S[1..n]$. The array has an attribute $S.top$ that indexes the most recently inserted element. The stack consists of elements $S[1..S.top]$, where $S[1]$ is the element at the bottom of the stack and $S[S.top]$ is the element at the top.

When $S.top = 0$, the stack contains no elements and is __empty__. We can test to see whether the stack is empty by query operation __STACK-EMPTY__. If we attempt to pop an empty stack, we say the stack __underflows__, which is normally an error. If $S.top$ exceeds $n$, the stack __overflows__.

> Each of the three stack operation takes $\Theta(1)$.

##### STACK-EMPTY(S)

{% highlight java %}
  if S.top == 0
    return TRUE
  else return FALSE
{% endhighlight %}

##### PUSH(S,x)

{% highlight java %}
  S.top = S.top + 1
  S[S.top] = x
{% endhighlight %}

##### POP(S)

{% highlight java %}
  if STACK-EMPTY(S)
    error "underflow"
  else S.top = S.top - 1
    return S[S.top + 1]
{% endhighlight %}

In Java there's a library for a __Stack__ object, it has all the following operations plus a few more. For more information about Java's stack object click <a href="http://docs.oracle.com/javase/7/docs/api/java/util/Stack.html" target="_blank">here</a>.